Title: Yacy - Another Example of Why Java Sucks
Category: foss
Tags: java, foss, search, yacy, bloat
Summary: Yacy - Another Example of Why Java Sucks

# Yacy: Another Example of Why Java Sucks

After reading yet another article about Google being forced to censor content by the DMCA, I 
stumbled upon [Yacy](http://www.yacy.net/). From their home page:

> ##Web Search by the people, for the people
>
> YaCy is a free search engine that anyone can use to build a search portal for their intranet 
or to help search the public internet. When contributing to the world-wide peer network, the 
scale of YaCy is limited only by the number of users in the world and can index billions of 
web pages. It is fully decentralized, all users of the search engine network are equal, the 
network does not store user search requests and it is not possible for anyone to censor the 
content of the shared index. We want to achieve freedom of information through a free, 
distributed web search which is powered by the world's users. 

As you can see, it is really quite an excellent idea. By using distributed hash tables (DHT) -- famous 
from BitTorrent clients -- and other peer-to-peer (P2P) mechanisms, Yacy avoids a single point 
of failure. Considering that censorship causes a failure of search to provide accurate results, 
this is very important.

## Test Drive

I decided to give it a try, and added the Debian repo to my headless Ubuntu server's sources.list, 
installed the openjdk-6-jre, since apparently either the package maintainers or the source cannot 
use the semi-current Java 7 runtime, and installed Yacy. 

The first thing I noticed is that `/etc/yacy/yacy.conf` is a thoroughly unsorted, uncommented 
mess. Which is because, unlike just about every other piece of software, yacy generates this file 
on start from a `yacy.init` file located elsewhere. This is a serious WTF!. 

Giving up for a moment on reading the config, I tried the web admin interface, and it is good, 
but limited. As is almost always the case, the GUI admin tools are just wrappers around text files. 
Which means that there is a high workload in maintaining synchronization between the core code 
that defines and uses config data and the GUI code that presents config data. For those in the 
Windows world, this might be tolerable; for *NIX admins, it sucks.

So, how well does the base install actually do with search? Crappy! Bad! Awful! 

Why? First of all, let provide two pieces of context. My WAN connection is a multihop wireless 
connection that is slow, [2.0 Mbps down and 0.25 Mbps up](http://www.speedtest.net/results.php?sh=95c6abf8092833e9a93fac49bdfdae87&ria=0),
and high latency, 50-200ms normally. That means that any bidirectional protocol, especially 
one with small packet sizes will suffer. Additionally, my test server is an old Intel Atom 330 
limited to 2 GB max RAM. 

Looking at `top`, I saw many dozens, possibly hundreds of yacy threads. Ouch! Additionally, the 
yacy JVM was taking up about 315MB more memory than the 512MB that I had set as its max in the 
admin GUI. 

I'm far from a java expert, having consciously avoided java for many years now. But, it seemed at 
first glance that much of the poor performance was due to excessive context switches and network 
timeouts. I may throw yacy on a Core i3 with 6GB just to see how it performs; but, the system was
so painfully slow that I uninstalled it before really trying to seriously analyze its performance.

Agonizing slowness and frequent timeouts aside, another big problem is the initial inability of 
yacy's indexing and ranking algorithms to avoid "SEO" spam. Results were almost entirely composed 
of posts to blogs, forums or wikis composed of nothing but lists of keywords. While yacy avoids 
censorship via content "de-indexing", it allows effective censorship by obfuscation. 

Since the performance was so pitiful, I was unable to explore what the possibilities are for 
improving the indexing and ranking from default. However, the thorough lack of any relevant pages
on yacy's wiki and the non-existence of an English language forum mean that I have little 
confidence that there is much to be found.

## Conclusion

While the project's goals are excellent, yacy fails to deliver in just about every possible 
measure of functionality. The reliance on java limits deployment to modern, high performance 
servers which means that deployment on resource limited VMs is out of the question. The 
nonstandard config setup dissuades experimentation. The use of P2P protocols, while essential to 
meet the goals of the project, also limit deployments to servers with reasonable fast, low latency 
upstream connections.

My initial thoughts are that the core functionality should be ported to an optimizable native 
language like C/C++ or perhaps something like Erlang while the UI elements should be moved to 
a separate project so that parallel and complementary implementations can be done in a variety 
of languages for different audiences and platforms. While this seems unlikely, yacy has still 
provided a foundation to be built on by different projects.
