Title: Deadline Rules -- for libvpx
Category: foss
Tags: ffmpeg, avconv, libvpx, vp8, webm
Summary: Deadline Rules -- for libvpx

## Deadline Rules -- for ***libvpx***

I've been playing around with WEBDAV and HTML5 video for in-home access to our video files. 
Being the FOSS zealot that I am, I really wanted to stick to an open format if possible and 
decided to try transcoding to [WebM](http://wiki.webmproject.org). My naive attempt 

`ffmpeg -i infile.avi -o outfile.webm` 

defaulted to the bizarrely low bitrate of ~256k. So time to RTFM...

Which actually doesn't exist as a quick `man avconv | grep libvpx` shows. Google, however, 
quickly leads to pages on *ffmpeg*'s and *webm*'s wikis with reasonable good instructions. My 
first post-RTFM attempt, 

`avconv -i infile.avi -c:a libvorbis -b:a 128k -c:v libvpx -b:v 1408k -qmin 0 -qmax 63 -crf 10 -vf "hqdn3d" -y -threads:0 2 -threads:1 1 outfile.webm`,

seemed to work, but was painfully slow. It managed **4fps** on a *Core i3 3270m*, which struck 
me as utterly bogus. 

What I had assumed was that ffmpeg/avconv would use reasonable defaults for unspecified options,
though it whould have been ovbious from my initial experiment that this was not the case. By 
adding `-deadline good` which overrides the default `best` deadline and `-cpu-used 0` which is 
for highest quality, I improved to about 17fps. 

`avconv -i infile.avi -c:a libvorbis -b:a 128k -c:v libvpx -deadline good -cpu-used 0 -b:v 1408k -qmin 0 -qmax 63 -crf 10 -vf "hqdn3d" -y -threads:0 2 -threads:1 1 outfile.webm`

Still not realtime transcoding, but 60% of realtime strikes me as quite manageable. The takeaway: 
when it comes to libvpx, always remember the `-deadline`. :)
