Title: P3P, WTF?
Category: foss
Tags: politics, privacy
Summary: P3P, WTF?

## P3P, WTF?

So, I'm trying to figure out why my Google Adsense ads are not displaying just to the right of 
here, and I stumble across this header: 

    P3P    policyref="http://googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/gcn_p3p_.xml", 
           CP="CURa ADMa DEVa TAIo PSAo PSDo OUR IND UNI PUR INT DEM STA PRE 
               COM NAV OTC NOI DSP COR"

I'm not a pro web admin, but I've installed and maintained numerous web apps over the years and 
have even written a couple using [Django](http://www.django.org/). This `P3P` header stumped me
so I went a google'n and found a great article by Lorrie Cranor. Please check out the article 
and other work at the source.

>[The problem with self-regulatory privacy standards seems to be that the industry considers 
them entirely optional, and no regulator has yet stepped in to say otherwise. Perhaps because 
no regulators have challenged those who contend that circumventing P3P is acceptable, some 
companies have already announced that they are going to bypass the Do Not Track controls in 
IE because they do not like Microsoft’s approach to default settings (see also my blog post 
about why I think the industry’s position on ignoring DNT in IE is wrong).
>
>Until we see enforcement actions to back up voluntary privacy standards such as P3P and  
(perhaps someday) Do Not Track, users will not be able to rely on them. Incentives for adoption 
and mechanisms for enforcement are essential. We are unlikely to see widespread adoption of a 
privacy policy standard if we do not address the most significant barrier to adoption: lack of 
incentives. If a new protocol were built into web browsers, search engines, mobile application 
platforms, and other tools in a meaningful way such that there was an advantage to adopting the 
protocol, we would see wider adoption. However, in such a scenario, there would also be 
significant incentives for companies to game the system and misrepresent their policies, so 
enforcement would be critical. Incentives could also come in the form of regulations that 
require adoption or provide a safe harbor to companies that adopt the protocol. Before we go 
too far down the road of developing new machine-readable privacy notices (whether comprehensive 
website notices like P3P, icon sets, notices for mobile applications, Do Not Track, or other 
anything else), it is essential to make sure adequate incentives will be put in place for them 
to be adopted, and that adequate enforcement mechanisms exist.](lorrie.cranor.org/blog/2012/12/03/p3p-is-dead-long-live-p3p/)
