Title: On Scottish Independence
Category: Politics, Foreign Affairs
Tags: Scotland, Vote, Independence, UK, Britain
Summary: Please Vote NO!

# Please, Scots, Vote NO!

Being a Yank, I've got no particular skin in this game, yet I find myself exceedingly anxious 
about the vote that is hours away. As one might deduce from the subtle title, I am strongly in 
favor of a "No" vote -- that is to say a rejection of Scottish independence.

Part, perhaps most, of my opinion is simply emotional. I've spent my entire life fond of the UK 
and of Scotland as an essential part thereof. Trying to imagine a world where James Bond would 
be the subject of MI6 surveillance, not an agent of of the Secret Service is almost painful.

Another is more practical, if abstract. The United Kingdom is one of the world's great powers, 
even without its colonial empire, simply because of the strength of its society and culture. 
From it place as a de-facto second leader of NATO to its role on the UN Security Council to its 
influence on international finance Great Britain is certainly "punching above its weight".

Add to that the more important, if more subtle, positive influence on global society through 
institutions like the BBC, Oxford, Cambridge, etc. These have global influence, educating and 
informing people everywhere. The diminution of Britain with the loss of Scotland would not 
immediately change this, but as the economic position of the nation shrank, so inevitably would 
its ability to fund education and journalism and entertainment of such quality.

Nowhere else, not Hollywood and Harvard, not Al Jazeera or the IIT has the ability to do what 
the great British institutions can. And, without Scots, these would be essentially reduced. 
Here's to a <b>United Kingdom</b> for centuries to come.
