Title: Rousseff Responds Well, Erdogan Not
Category: politics
Tags: international affairs, brazil, turkey, protests, democracy
Summary: Rousseff Responds Well

## Rousseff Responds Well, Erdogan Not

The contrast between the reaction to public protests in Brazil and Turkey is amazing. From the 
*New York Times*:

>  On Saturday, Mr. Erdogan claimed that the protests were carried out “with malicious 
intentions.” “You became the pawns in a dirty game and were deceived gravely,” he said, 
according to the semiofficial Anatolian news agency, referring to young activists who have been 
attending protests in more than 60 cities. “Nobody but God will have the power to overthrow our 
government,” Mr. Erdogan said at a rally in Samsun, a town on the Black Sea coast. 
[NYTimes](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/23/world/europe/police-use-water-cannons-on-istanbul-protesters.html)

>  In a speech on Friday night, Ms. Rousseff, a former guerrilla who fought the country’s 
military dictatorship in the 1970s, praised the demonstrators for bringing a new energy to 
Brazilian politics and said repeatedly that she would listen to “the voice of the streets.” 
“If we can take advantage of the impulse of this new political energy,” she said, “we can do 
many things better and faster that Brazil has not been able to do because of political or 
economic limitations.” 
[NYTimes](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/23/world/americas/despite-promises-by-brazils-president-protesters-plan-another-day-of-demonstrations.html)

Given that both sets of protests began over relatively trivial local governance issues -- 
public transit fares in Brazil and the use of a city park for commercial building in Turkey -- 
and grew into nationwide expressions of discontent over numerous complaints, the situation for 
each nation's leader was quite similar. In addition, in both cases, excessive use of force by 
law enforcement at the outset of both sets of protests exacerbated tensions.

What is so impressive in the case of Ms. Rousseff and so shameful in the case of Mr. Erdogan is 
the subsequent reaction. While Erdogan has managed harsh, paranoid and occassionally 
hallucinatory stream of rhetoric of the kind that we would have expected from the late Crazy
Colonel Kadhafi, Rousseff has tried to channel the chaos into constructive political action. 

It seems clear that Erdogan is unwilling to restrain himself, even in the face of losing 
Turkey's opportunity to join the EU as a result. Whether continued denial of the Turkish 
protesters' legitimate complaints combined with continued aggressive crowd control ends up 
suffocating the reform impulse will be interesting to see. If it does not, Erdogan be faced with 
the choice between calling early elections or setting down the course of his former friend Assad.

It also remains to be seen whether Rousseff's policies match her rhetoric and whether that will 
be sufficient to achieve her stated aims of using the energy of discontent to enhance the 
governance and well-being of Brazil's society will come to pass. I hope they do; and, I am quite 
sure that her approach is much more likely to end well for her and her country.
