Title: Egypt and the Incompatibility of Islam and Governance
Category: politics
Tags: egypt, islam, muslim brotherhood, governance, democracy
Summary: Egypt and the Incompatibility of Islam and Governance

## Egypt and the Incompatibility of Islam and Governance

One of the things that has puzzled me is the apparent incompatibility between Islam as a state's
majority religion and effective and sustainable governance of that state. To me, there is a 
pretty clear and convincing correlation between majority Islam and poor governance. What I am 
not clear about is whether there is something specific to Islam that is at least partially 
causative of these failures.

The *New York Times* has a very good article about the consequences of the recent popularly 
supported military coup in Egypt that overturned the controversial and incompetent year-long 
incumbency of the [Muslim Brotherhood](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muslim_Brotherhood) in the 
country's upper house and Brotherhood member Mohamed Morsi as President.

>From Benghazi to Abu Dhabi, Islamists are drawing lessons from Mr. Morsi’s ouster that could 
shape political Islam for a generation. For some, it demonstrated the futility of democracy in 
a world dominated by Western powers and their client states. But others, acknowledging that the 
takeover accompanied a broad popular backlash, also faulted the leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood 
for reaching too fast for so many levers of power.
[NYTimes](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/05/world/middleeast/for-islamists-lessons-in-politics-and-governing.html?partner=rss&emc=rss&_r=0) 

The past year in Egypt was marked by both almost constant decline in social order and economic 
productivity -- the abject failure to govern. In addition, Morsi and the Brotherhood responded 
to challenges to their electoral legitimacy and agenda by becoming increasingly authoritatian. 
Bad on both fronts. While this colossal f*ck-up is clearly the responsibility of Morsi and the 
Brotherhood leadership, it would be interesting to determine how much of this is due to the 
"conservative Islamist" nature of the group and how much is due to other factors. 

>The Brotherhood’s fall is the greatest in an array of setbacks that have halted the once 
seemingly unstoppable march of political Islam. As they have moved from opposition to 
establishment, Islamist parties in Turkey, Tunisia and now Egypt have all been caught up in 
crises over the secular practicalities of governing like power sharing, urban planning, public 
security or even keeping the lights on.
[NYTimes](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/05/world/middleeast/for-islamists-lessons-in-politics-and-governing.html?partner=rss&emc=rss&_r=0) 

Let's catalog some of the above mentioned setbacks.

- Turkey: The repressive, over-the-top, paranoid response to civil protests about the 
destruction of a public park for commercial purposes seems to have scuttled Turkey's prospects 
of joining the EU with all the economic and social benefits that would entail. This happens to
be a direct contrast to the majority Catholic Brasil which responded to similar protests in a 
[wholy constructive manner](./rousseff-follows-through.html).

- Iraq: Though there can be no doubt that Rumsfeld's Rowdies were hugely incompetent immediately
after the overthrow of Saddam Hussein; those that followed worked hard to clean up their mess 
and provide Iraq with the resources to develop a functional civil society. Since complete 
sovereignty was released to the Shiite majority government, the token sense of Iraqi nationalism
has pretty much dissolved with Kurdistan being an effective separate state and the Shiite 
government fighting to surpress an armed Sunni insurgency.  

- Iran: The center of Shia Islam has, since the 1979 revolution, become effectively a hybrid of 
old-school "divine right" monarchy and Stalinism. While the Ayatollah and Revolutionary Guard 
are fully in control, Iran's culture and economy have stagnated. 

- Pakistan: Pakistan seems to be trying very hard to get in the *Guinness Book* as the world's 
most massive failed state. Dozens of deliverable nuclear warheads, ubiquitous power outages, a 
majority of the nation's land area outside of the reliable control of civil authorities, several
disjoint armed anti-government groups, the list goes on almost ad infinitum. While sharing much 
of the same history, culture and situation of fellow former colony India, Pakistan is slowly 
declining into chaos while India is slowly growing into a major world power.

- Afghanistan, Sudan, Libya, etc.

Not that *Islamist* governments have any sort of monopoly on poor policy and incompetent 
administration, just look to Zimbabwe, Venezuela, and the penultimate example of bad governance 
-- the DPRK (Downtrodden People Ruled by Kims). Incompetence and excellence are both universal 
but it appears to me that something in the nature of majority muslim nations provides a strong 
bias towards the former.

My guess is that Islam tends to conflate religious authority with civil authority, while most 
other populations -- regardless of rhetoric -- tend to have some separation between civil and 
religious authority. Because religious scholarship is almost universally segrated from the 
general population and is greatly focused on the historical and abstract, it seems almost 
impossible for a *cleric* of any sect to have the requisite education and political sensibility 
to govern a large society well.

I wonder if it is possible for ***any*** society that places theologians as administrators to 
have good governance and be sustainable for significant periods of time? Though it is clearly 
politically incorrect to say so, I wonder if Mr. Haddad is right (about all religious 
fundamentalists):
 
> “The message will resonate throughout the Muslim world loud and clear: democracy is not for 
Muslims,” Essam el-Haddad, Mr. Morsi’s foreign policy adviser, warned on his official Web site 
shortly before the military detained him and cut off all his communication. 
[NYTimes](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/05/world/middleeast/for-islamists-lessons-in-politics-and-governing.html?partner=rss&emc=rss&_r=0) 

One thing is clear at this point: until religious fundamentalists, from the Muslim killing Hindus 
in Myanmar to the settlement building Jews in Israel to the abortion-and-food stamp banning 
Christians in the US, accept that they will ***never*** be the sole subset of any significant 
population, they will never be able to cater to the commonweal.
