Title: Berlusconi Convicted, Stays in Office
Category: politics
Tags: international affairs, politics, justice, italy, Silvio Berlusconi
Summary: Berlusconi Convicted, Stays in Office

## Berlusconi Convicted, Stays in Office

Italian politics always has touch of the circus to it, from porn star parliamentarians to
comedian Beppe Grillo's *Five Star* political movement. Silvio Berlusconi has managed to 
take things to a whole new level.

> ROME — A Milan court on Monday found former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi guilty of paying 
for sex with a minor and abusing his office to cover it up, handing him a seven-year jail 
sentence and banning him from public office for life. 
[NYTimes](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/25/world/europe/milan-court-sentences-berlusconi-to-seven-years.html?partner=rss&emc=rss)

The amazing part is not what he was convicted for --  plenty of politicians have been busted
paying for sex -- rather the amazing thing is:

>The former prime minister, who denies wrongdoing, does not immediately have to leave his seat 
in Parliament while the case faces two rounds of appeals. ... Mr. Berlusconi, 76, who is widely 
seen as remaining in politics to keep his parliamentary immunity and to protect his business 
interests...
[NYTimes](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/25/world/europe/milan-court-sentences-berlusconi-to-seven-years.html?partner=rss&emc=rss) 

It boggles my mind that the Italian electorate is so accustomed to greed, corruption, debauchery 
and general criminality in their elected leaders that ANYONE supports him. Even presuming that 
this particular charge is trumped-up, there are multiple simultaneous cases proceeding against 
him. While in a pseudo-dictatorship like Putin's Russia it might be possible to falsify all the 
charges, in a society as free-wheeling and unguided as Italy, that is beyond belief.

I just hope that the conviction and ban stand. That might, just might, be the beginning of a
culture of professional responsibility and ethics in Italian politics.
