Title: NYC Council Reigns in Cops
Category: politics
Tags: New York, police, justice, fear
Summary: NYC Council Reigns in Cops

## NYC Council Reigns in Cops

The New York City Council just passed a couple bills attempting to bring some accountability to
the police force and some balance to the City's justice system. According to the 
[NYTimes:](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/28/nyregion/police-leader-says-city-will-suffer-under-oversight-measures.html?partner=rss&emc=rss)

>One bill, known as Intro 1079, would create an independent inspector general to monitor and 
review police policy, conduct investigations and recommend changes to the department. The 
monitor would be part of the city’s Investigation Department alongside the inspectors general 
for other city agencies. The law would go into effect Jan. 1, 2014, leaving the matter of 
choosing the monitor to the next mayor.

>The other bill, Intro 1080, would expand the definition of bias-based profiling to include age, 
gender, housing status and sexual orientation. It also would allow individuals to sue the 
Police Department in state court — not only for individual instances of bias, but also for 
policies that disproportionately affect people in any protected categories without serving a 
significant law enforcement goal.

>Both measures passed the 51-member Council with the votes needed to override a mayoral veto — 
although the profiling bill did so 34 to 17, giving it the precise number of required votes.

As one would expect from an agency that has leveraged racism, classism and terrorism to promote 
a culture of fear that increases police powers and excuses abuses thereof, Chief Raymond Kelly 
took the opportunity to threaten the City with increased shootings. While there will certainly 
be consequences from accountable policing, the vast majority will be positive.

Consider that, at least as a young male, the chances of being harrased or injured by a police 
officer are vastly greater than those of being the victim of a crime that abusive policing 
could have prevented. By limiting the damage inflicted on the citizens by the police, the City 
will, on balance, have a much safer and more productive population.

It is a shame that the chances of this kind of accoutability being brough to bear on all police 
agencies throughout the nation, from municipal to federal, is almost nonexistent.

Although I support the effort, I am concerned that these bills are duplicative and potentially 
saddle the City with an unneeded bureaucracy in addition that will end up dividing percieved 
jurisdiction with the courts. Additionally, one of the chronic problems with the American legal 
system generally is the limited access that the poor and middle-class have to effective legal 
protection. 

If it is necessary to hire a private attorney in order to challenge a biased police stop, most 
of the victims of racial and economic profiling will be unable to access the justice that 1080 
is intended to provide.    