Title: Hypocrisy, PC Crisis Management Style
Category: politics
Tags: hypocrisy, Paula Deen, greed, political correctness
Summary: Paula Deen Tossed Under the PC Bandwagon

## Hypocrisy, PC Crisis Management Style

#Paula Deen Tossed Under the PC Bandwagon

> Paula Deen got a rare bit of good news on Thursday: Her new cookbook hit No. 1 on the best-seller list at Amazon.com, as thousands of fans — many of them springing to her defense as she faces accusations of racism — ordered the book months before its October release. But on Friday, its publisher, Random House, said it would not publish the cookbook, and would cancel a five-book contract it signed with Ms. Deen last year.

> The book deal was one of the last remaining lucrative business relationships for the embattled celebrity chef. Its cancellation came on a day when Sears, Kmart and J. C. Penney announced that they would stop selling products, including cookbooks, branded with her name.

> Since last week, the Food Network, Smithfield Foods, Walmart, Target, Caesars Entertainment, QVC and the pharmaceutical company Novo Nordisk have decided to suspend or sever ties with Ms. Deen after her admission in a legal deposition that she had used racist language in the past and allowed racist, sexist, homophobic and anti-Semitic jokes in one of her restaurants. Ms. Deen was deposed on video as part of a discrimination lawsuit filed last year by a former employee.
[NYTimes](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/29/business/media/publisher-drops-book-deal-with-tv-chef-paula-deen.html?partner=rss&emc=rss&_r=0)

Let's thinks this through... You have a low-class, old, white, southern celebrity *chef* whose primary appeal is to the Wal-Mart shopping, double-wide living, redneck crowd. You make money off ignorant hill-billies committing suicide by saturated fat. You are ***shocked*** and ***offended*** when your prize cracker turns out to actually have acted and spoken like... a cracker? Wow, that MBA sure helped with the critical thinking!

I've always found Paula Deen vaguely disgusting, but that is because I'd much rather have falafel than fried butter. I find it thoroughly unsurprising that she would tell crude jokes, use the word "nigger", or other such offensive behaviour since that is almost exactly the stereotype that she is marketing. What does surprise and offend me is that anyone without severe cognitive impairment would expect someone who owns a joint called ***Bubba's*** not to be and act like a Bubba.

If you are going to criticize Paula Deen for encouraging millions to risk heart disease, diabetes, etc., fine. But to criticize her for being the hill-billy you are making millions off, that is a shameful display of hypocrisy.